README.md, before:

# PsychXR
[![GitHub release (latest by date including pre-releases)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/mdcutone/psychxr?include_prereleases)](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/releases)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/psychxr)](https://pypi.org/project/psychxr/)
![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/psychxr)
![PyPI - Wheel](https://img.shields.io/pypi/wheel/psychxr)
[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/supported-DK2%20|%20CV1%20|%20S%20|%20Quest-blue.svg)](https://shields.io/)

PsychXR is a collection of [Python](https://www.python.org/) extension libraries 
for interacting with eXtended Reality displays (HMDs), intended for neuroscience 
and psychology research applications.

While academic researchers are the intended audience for PsychXR, it now sees 
use in industry for prototyping and development of VR related solutions.

PsychXR is used by PsychoPy v3 (http://www.psychopy.org/) to provide HMD 
support.

## Why PsychXR?

PsychXR is intended to provide near direct access to HMD driver APIs using a 
thin and very fast interface. This can be useful in situations where other tools 
fail to expose or limit device capabilities. Furthermore, PsychXR does not 
require large runtimes and has minimal dependencies, allowing users to more 
easily share their applications over low-bandwidth connections for easier remote 
testing.

PsychXR is free and open source, unlike many of the tools widely used by 
researchers for creating VR experiments. If you'd like to keep the future of VR 
research as open as possible, consider using or supporting projects like 
[PsychXR](http://psychxr.org), [PsychoPy](https://www.psychopy.org/), 
[psychtoolbox](http://psychtoolbox.org/), [OpenHMD](http://www.openhmd.net/) and 
the [Godot Engine](https://godotengine.org/). 

## Supported Devices

Device support varies depending on the extension used. PsychXR provides access 
to the following HMD driver interfaces through extension modules.

### LibOVR - `psychxr.drivers.libovr`

Interface using the official (proprietary) Oculus PC SDK and runtime. Provides 
excellent, near complete support for PC based Oculus HMDs. Most feature rich and 
mature interface that is included with PsychXR and the recommended one for users 
of the following devices:
  * Oculus Rift (DK2, CV1, and S)
  * Oculus Quest (1 and 2 with link cable)
    
### OpenHMD - `psychxr.drivers.openhmd`

This extension uses the free and open source [OpenHMD](http://www.openhmd.net/) 
library which supports a wide range of commercial HMDs. The level of support 
varies depending on the headset being used 
(see [supported OpenHMD devices](http://www.openhmd.net/index.php/devices/) for 
more info). PsychXR ships with a version of OpenHMD that supports the following 
devices:
  * Oculus Rift (DK1, DK2, CV1, and S)
  * HTC Vive and Vive Pro
  * Windows Mixed Reality
  * Deepoon E2 
    
[NoloVR CV1](https://www.nolovr.com/productDetails?lang=en_US) 
controllers are fully supported as peripherals by OpenHMD (not tested by the 
developers of PsychXR).

The `openhmd` extension is **experimental**, presently providing only a simple 
wrapper around the OpenHMD library. OpenHMD **does not** provide a compositor, 
or positional tracking (yet) for a majority of devices listed, requiring users 
to come up with their own solutions.

OpenHMD is cross platform and will eventually allow PsychXR to be used on 
operating systems other than Windows. 

## Installation

See [Getting PsychXR](http://psychxr.org/installing.html) for installation 
instructions. Pre-built packages are available for Python 3.6, however PsychXR 
will build on later versions of Python.

## Limitations

There are several limitations to the current version of PsychXR which may make 
it unsuitable for certain applications.

* Only Oculus VR HMDs which use the PC SDK (Rift S, CV1, DK2 and Quest 1+2) are 
  supported, the CV1 and S are recommended. There are currently no plans to 
  support the mobile SDK or distribution over app stores.
* OpenGL is required for rendering, no support for other graphics APIs (i.e. 
  Vulkan and DirectX) is available at this time. You must use some OpenGL 
  framework such as Pyglet, GLFW (
  [example](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/blob/master/demo/rift/libovr_headtracking.py)) 
  or PyOpenGL with PsychXR to create visual stimuli.

## Support

If you encounter problems with PsychXR, please submit an issue to 
[PsychXR's issue tracker](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/issues). *This 
software is not officially supported by any device vendor or manufacturer! 
Please do not direct PsychXR support requests to them.*

## News

For updates on PsychXR's development, see 
[NEWS](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/blob/master/NEWS.md).

## Contributing

If you would like to expand on PsychXR, feel free to submit pull requests. Help 
for doing the following would be greatly appreciated:

* OpenXR or OpenVR support
* Driver access for other VR related tools such as OptiTrack(tm) and Leap Motion
  devices.

## Authors

* **Matthew D. Cutone** - Open Science Tools Ltd. - (https://github.com/mdcutone)
* **Dr. Laurie M. Wilcox** - The Centre for Vision Research, York University

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file 
for details.

## How To Cite PsychXR

If you use PsychXR for your research, please use the following citation:

```
Cutone, M. D. & Wilcox, L. M. (2021). PsychXR (Version 0.2.4) [Software]. Available from https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr.
```

Commit message:

DOCS: Tell users that readme corresponds to the development version.

README.md, after:

# PsychXR
[![GitHub release (latest by date including pre-releases)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/mdcutone/psychxr?include_prereleases)](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/releases)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/psychxr)](https://pypi.org/project/psychxr/)
![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/psychxr)
![PyPI - Wheel](https://img.shields.io/pypi/wheel/psychxr)
[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/supported-DK2%20|%20CV1%20|%20S%20|%20Quest-blue.svg)](https://shields.io/)

PsychXR is a collection of [Python](https://www.python.org/) extension libraries 
for interacting with eXtended Reality displays (HMDs), intended for neuroscience 
and psychology research applications.

While academic researchers are the intended audience for PsychXR, it now sees 
use in industry for prototyping and development of VR related solutions.

PsychXR is used by PsychoPy v3 (http://www.psychopy.org/) to provide HMD 
support.

**Note that this README refers to the development version of PsychXR.**

## Why PsychXR?

PsychXR is intended to provide near direct access to HMD driver APIs using a 
thin and very fast interface. This can be useful in situations where other tools 
fail to expose or limit device capabilities. Furthermore, PsychXR does not 
require large runtimes and has minimal dependencies, allowing users to more 
easily share their applications over low-bandwidth connections for easier remote 
testing.

PsychXR is free and open source, unlike many of the tools widely used by 
researchers for creating VR experiments. If you'd like to keep the future of VR 
research as open as possible, consider using or supporting projects like 
[PsychXR](http://psychxr.org), [PsychoPy](https://www.psychopy.org/), 
[psychtoolbox](http://psychtoolbox.org/), [OpenHMD](http://www.openhmd.net/) and 
the [Godot Engine](https://godotengine.org/). 

## Supported Devices

Device support varies depending on the extension used. PsychXR provides access 
to the following HMD driver interfaces through extension modules.

### LibOVR - `psychxr.drivers.libovr`

Interface using the official (proprietary) Oculus PC SDK and runtime. Provides 
excellent, near complete support for PC based Oculus HMDs. Most feature rich and 
mature interface that is included with PsychXR and the recommended one for users 
of the following devices:
  * Oculus Rift (DK2, CV1, and S)
  * Oculus Quest (1 and 2 with link cable)
    
### OpenHMD - `psychxr.drivers.openhmd`

This extension uses the free and open source [OpenHMD](http://www.openhmd.net/) 
library which supports a wide range of commercial HMDs. The level of support 
varies depending on the headset being used 
(see [supported OpenHMD devices](http://www.openhmd.net/index.php/devices/) for 
more info). PsychXR ships with a version of OpenHMD that supports the following 
devices:
  * Oculus Rift (DK1, DK2, CV1, and S)
  * HTC Vive and Vive Pro
  * Windows Mixed Reality
  * Deepoon E2 
    
[NoloVR CV1](https://www.nolovr.com/productDetails?lang=en_US) 
controllers are fully supported as peripherals by OpenHMD (not tested by the 
developers of PsychXR).

The `openhmd` extension is **experimental**, presently providing only a simple 
wrapper around the OpenHMD library. OpenHMD **does not** provide a compositor, 
or positional tracking (yet) for a majority of devices listed, requiring users 
to come up with their own solutions.

OpenHMD is cross platform and will eventually allow PsychXR to be used on 
operating systems other than Windows. 

## Installation

See [Getting PsychXR](http://psychxr.org/installing.html) for installation 
instructions. Pre-built packages are available for Python 3.6, however PsychXR 
will build on later versions of Python.

## Limitations

There are several limitations to the current version of PsychXR which may make 
it unsuitable for certain applications.

* Only Oculus VR HMDs which use the PC SDK (Rift S, CV1, DK2 and Quest 1+2) are 
  supported, the CV1 and S are recommended. There are currently no plans to 
  support the mobile SDK or distribution over app stores.
* OpenGL is required for rendering, no support for other graphics APIs (i.e. 
  Vulkan and DirectX) is available at this time. You must use some OpenGL 
  framework such as Pyglet, GLFW (
  [example](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/blob/master/demo/rift/libovr_headtracking.py)) 
  or PyOpenGL with PsychXR to create visual stimuli.

## Support

If you encounter problems with PsychXR, please submit an issue to 
[PsychXR's issue tracker](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/issues). *This 
software is not officially supported by any device vendor or manufacturer! 
Please do not direct PsychXR support requests to them.*

## News

For updates on PsychXR's development, see 
[NEWS](https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr/blob/master/NEWS.md).

## Contributing

If you would like to expand on PsychXR, feel free to submit pull requests. Help 
for doing the following would be greatly appreciated:

* OpenXR or OpenVR support
* Driver access for other VR related tools such as OptiTrack(tm) and Leap Motion
  devices.

## Authors

* **Matthew D. Cutone** - Open Science Tools Ltd. - (https://github.com/mdcutone)
* **Dr. Laurie M. Wilcox** - The Centre for Vision Research, York University

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file 
for details.

## How To Cite PsychXR

If you use PsychXR for your research, please use the following citation:

```
Cutone, M. D. & Wilcox, L. M. (2021). PsychXR (Version 0.2.4) [Software]. Available from https://github.com/mdcutone/psychxr.
```
